
Datasets API
=============



General
--------

Datasets, like all objects accessible using the different APIs in Metax, have an internal identifier field ``identifier``, which uniquely identifies a record withing Metax.

The standard way to retrieve a single dataset is by sending a request to the API ``GET /rest/v2/datasets/<pid>``, where ``<pid>`` is the record's internal identifier. The result returned from the API contains various information about the state of the dataset, such as last-modified timestamps, PAS state, and other data. Included is also the field probably of the most interest to end users: The ``research_dataset`` field. ``research_dataset`` contains the actual user-provided metadata descriptions of *The* Dataset.

Datasets can be listed and browsed using the API ``GET /rest/v2/datasets``. Retrieving a dataset or listing datasets can be augmented in various ways by using additional parameters. For details, see swagger's section about datasets.

When creating a new dataset, it is recommended to always create the new dataset first into draft state by using the optional query parameter ``?draft=true``. When the dataset is in draft state, you can freely modify the dataset and add or remove files from it, until you are satisfied with the result and ready to publish the dataset for all world to find. Draft datasets can also be permanently deleted at any time without any trace left behind, unlike published datasets. If the query parameter ``?draft=true`` is left out (or value is ``false``), the dataset is published immediately upon creation. This can be particularly useful for large automated jobs where creating a draft first may be an unnecessary middle-step.



Data model visualization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The dataset data model visualization can be seen here https://tietomallit.suomi.fi/model/mrd. The data model visualization is very helpful to keep open when creating dataset metadata descriptions, as it shows all the different possible fields and relations, which can be used, which fields are mandatory, and so on.

Additionally, the chosen data catalog may have some additional restrictions to the schema, such as reduced relations, or reduced mandatory fields. Read more about data catalogs and their implications here :ref:`rst-data-catalogs-v2`.



Dataset schemas
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

JSON schema files dataset metadata descriptions (field ``research_dataset``):

    * `IDA datasets <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CSCfi/metax-api/__METAX_ENV_BRANCH__/src/metax_api/api/rest/v2/schemas/ida_dataset_schema.json>`_ (schema used in IDA data catalog)
    * `ATT datasets <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CSCfi/metax-api/__METAX_ENV_BRANCH__/src/metax_api/api/rest/v2/schemas/att_dataset_schema.json>`_ (schema used in ATT data catalog)

There are also other schemas for datasets in other data catalogs for specialized use, such as for harvesting.



Common schema validation errors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Schema validation errors can sometimes be difficult to decipher for an untrained eye, and in some cases they just simply don't tell exactly what's wrong with some object or value (e.g. when object is not conforming to oneOf objects!). Here are some common hard-to-understand error messages, and tips what to look for.


**"<object> is not valid under any of the given schemas"**


    Can happen with ``oneOf`` objects (``ResearchAgent`` is one of ``Person`` or ``Organization`` objects). Depending which type of object you have used (person or organization), double check that the fields on that object conform to either the ``Person`` object or the ``Organization`` object in the dataset schema. Ensure:

        * field values are of the correct type
        * mandatory fields are present
        * relation field cardinalities are correct (is the relation field an array, or a single object?)

    Unfortunately the ``oneOf`` errors are not very detailed in the current schema validation library.



Terminology
^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Records, catalog records**

The results returned from the API ``GET /rest/v2/datasets/<pid>`` are also sometimes called "catalog records", or "records". At the top level there are Data Catalogs, and Data Catalogs contain Catalog Records. Catalog records can be considered the "technical" name of a dataset inside Metax.


**Identifier**

Usually when ``identifier`` is mentioned in the documentation, by default it refers to the internal Metax identifier of an object. The internal identifier field always resides on the root level of the object retrieved from Metax API.


**Preferred Identifier**

Preferred identifier is the "public" identifier of a dataset. When referring to a dataset in publications, tweets, or where ever in the outside world, preferred identifier is the identifier to use. When creating datasets in Metax, preferred identifiers are always automatically generated by Metax. Harvested datasets are an exception: Harvested datasets will use the identifier in the original source as the preferred identifier.


**User metadata**

When a user has added some files to a dataset, the user can choose to write additional descriptions to those files. The files already include various automatically generated technical metadata, such as byte sizes, mime types, checksum values and algorithms and such, but any extra metadata that the user wishes to enter about some file is called "user metadata".


.. _rst-data-catalogs-v2:

Data Catalogs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Every dataset belongs in a Data Catalog. Data catalogs house datasets with different origins (harvested vs. Fairdata user provided datasets), slightly different schemas (IDA and ATT catalogs for example), and datasets in some catalogs are automatically versioned. While reading datasets from all catalogs is possible by anybody (save for some data which might be considered as sensitive, such as personal information), adding datasets to catalogs can be restricted: Others allow adding only by known services, but some also by end users.

Data catalogs can be browsed by using the API ``/rest/datacatalogs``. The data catalog data model visualization can be found here https://tietomallit.suomi.fi/model/mdc. The data catalog JSON schema file can be found `here <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CSCfi/metax-api/__METAX_ENV_BRANCH__/src/metax_api/api/rest/v2/schemas/datacatalog_schema.json>`_.

The official Fairdata data catalogs with end user write access are:


+---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Catalog | Purpose                                                                                    | Identifier                         |
+---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| IDA     | Store datasets which have files stored in the IDA Fairdata service.                        | urn:nbn:fi:att:data-catalog-ida    |
+---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| ATT     | Store datasets which have data stored elsewhere than in the IDA Fairdata service.          | urn:nbn:fi:att:data-catalog-att    |
+---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| PAS     | Store datasets which have data (or a copy of the data) stored in the Fairdata PAS service. | urn:nbn:fi:att:data-catalog-pas    |
+---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+


Other data catalogs where End Users can directly store dataset metadata:


+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Catalog | Purpose                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Identifier                         |
+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Legacy  | Store legacy datasets that are published elsewhere. Published datasets may not have all of the required metadata to qualify as Fairdata-dataset. Identifiers are not generated by Metax: User has to provide any identifiers.      | urn:nbn:fi:att:data-catalog-legacy |
+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Draft   | Store datasets which are in draft state and data catalog is not yet decided. This catalog is used as a default catalog when creating datasets. Note you must change catalog to one from above before file addition or publication. | urn:nbn:fi:att:data-catalog-dft    |
+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+



Choosing the right Data Catalog
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Other than the harvested data catalogs managed by Fairdata harvesters, the two most interesting data catalogs are probably the IDA catalog, and the ATT catalog, commonly referred to as "the Fairdata catalogs". Also common for these catalogs is the fact that end users can add datasets to them. For the most parts these two catalogs are behaviourally identical, but they do serve different purposes, and have one critical technical difference.


**IDA catalog**

The IDA catalog hosts datasets, which have their files stored in the Fairdata IDA service. The datasets stored in this catalog use a schema which allow to use the fields ``research_dataset.files`` (`dataset file data model <https://tietomallit.suomi.fi/model/mrd/File/>`_) and ``research_dataset.directories`` (`dataset directory data model <https://tietomallit.suomi.fi/model/mrd/Directory/>`_), which are used to list and describe related files in IDA. On the other hand, the schema is missing the field ``research_dataset.remote_resources``, meaning it does not allow listing files stored in other file storages than IDA.

.. note:: For end users it is important to note, that you will never be "creating" or "storing" new files in Metax or in IDA by using Metax API: Files are always stored by using the IDA service (https://www.fairdata.fi/en/ida/). Once the files have been stored (frozen) using IDA, the metadata of the stored files is automatically sent to Metax. Then, using Metax APIs, the metadata of the files can be browsed, and linked to datasets, and finally published to the world as part of a dataset.


**ATT catalog**

The ATT catalog is the opposite of the IDA catalog: It hosts datasets whose files are stored elsewhere than in the Fairdata IDA service. The datasets in this catalog use a schema which allow using the field ``research_dataset.remote_resources`` (`dataset remote resource data model <https://tietomallit.suomi.fi/model/mrd/WebResource/>`_), while missing the IDA related fields.


**PAS catalog**

The PAS catalog contains metadata of datasets that either have all their data store in the Fairdata PAS service, or a copy of the data. Datasets can not be created into this catalog freely, but require a special contract with the PAS service to do so.


**Attaching a dataset to a catalog**

When creating a new dataset and wishing to use for example the ATT catalog, the dataset would be linked to it in the following way:


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    dataset_data = {
        "data_catalog": "urn:nbn:fi:att:data-catalog-att",
        "research_dataset": {
            # lots of content...
        }
    }

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets', json=dataset_data, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 201, response.content


For more involving examples, see the :ref:`examples<rst-dataset-examples-v2>` section for datasets.



Dataset lifecycle in Metax
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1) A dataset is created as a draft. When in draft state:
    * Files can be added and removed from the dataset freely.
    * Metadata descriptions can be edited.
    * The dataset is not publicly findable.
    * The dataset can be premanently deleted at any time by the user.
2) A dataset is published. When the dataset is published:
    * The dataset's metadata descriptions can still be updated at any time.
    * Files can no longer be freely added or removed (a couple of exceptions remain, see :ref:`rst-dataset-versioning-v2`).
    * The dataset becomes publicly findable (any selected access restrictions, such as embargo, applies).
    * Dataset receives permanent resolvable identifiers.
    * Dataset can no longer be premanently deleted. A tombstone page will remain after deletion.
    * New versions can be created from the datasets, where files can again be freely added or removed until dataset is published.
3) Dataset is stored to PAS (long-term preservation) through the PAS process.
    * A PAS contract is needed to store datasets into PAS.
    * Is not a mandatory step in the lifecycle of all datasets.
    * If an IDA dataset is taken to PAS, the original dataset continues its life as a separate dataset.
    * Datasets can also be created directly into PAS (directly into the PAS catalog).
4) A dataset is implicitly deprecated as a result of someone deleting a dataset's files from the file storage.
5) A dataset is explicitly deleted by the user.



Read-only metadata fields
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the field ``research_dataset``, the following metadata fields are generally considered ``read-only`` for the user:

    * ``total_files_byte_size`` (calculated by Metax)
    * ``total_remote_resources_byte_size`` (calculated by Metax)
    * ``metadata_version_identifier`` (generated by Metax)
    * ``preferred_identifier``

For ``preferred_identifier``, exceptions exist: For harvested datasets, the harvester must set the value, and in certain data catalogs, the user must provide the value. In cases where the value is missing when required to be provided, Metax will raise an error to inform the user.



End User API: Writable fields
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When using the End User API, some restrictions apply which fields can be set or modified by the user.

When creating a record using the REST API, the following catalog record root-level fields can be set:

    * ``data_catalog``
    * ``research_dataset``
    * ``cumulative_state``

When updating a record using the REST API, the following catalog record root-level fields can be updated:

    * ``research_dataset``

When using the RPC API, some fields are automatically updated as a result, such as when publishing a dataset (``state`` is updated), or when changing cumulative state of the dataset, e.g. closing a cumulative period (``cumulative_state`` is updated, ``date_cumulation_ended`` is updated). See the swagger doc pages for details about available RPC API endpoints.



If-Modified-Since header in dataset API
----------------------------------------

If-Modified-Since header can be used in ``GET /rest/v2/datasets``, ``GET|PUT|PATCH /rest/v2/datasets/<pid>``, or ``GET /rest/v2/datasets/identifiers`` requests. This will return the result(s) only if the resources have been modified after the date specified in the header. In update operations the use of the header works as with other types of resources in Metax API. The format of the header should follow guidelines mentioned in https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/If-Modified-Since

If the requested resource has not been modified after the date specified in the header, the response will be ``304 Not Modified``.



.. _rst-dataset-versioning-v2:

Dataset versioning
-------------------



General
^^^^^^^^


**What does dataset versioning mean?**

At the core of dataset versioning is the need to enforce immutability of files that a dataset consists of. When a dataset is created into draft state, files can be freely added or removed from it. Once the draft dataset is published, the set of files becomes permanent, and files can no longer be freely added or removed.

Exceptions exist to the rule of not being able change files of a published dataset:

1) Cumulative datasets
    * If a dataset has been marked as cumulative dataset, files can be freely added to it as long as the cumulative period remains open. Removing files is not permitted. Once the cumulative period is closed, adding new files to the dataset is no longer permitted.
2) Dataset is published, but has 0 files in it
    * It's possible to publish a dataset without any files in it. In this case, it will be possible to add files to the dataset one time. After that, normal restrictions will apply. When using the API, this means that the files should be added in a single request to the API.

As a slightly less significant form of versioning, when updating the contents of field ``research_dataset``, the previous metadata version is archived so it may be accessed or restored later.

.. note:: As an end user who is editing the descriptions of their datasets, you generally shouldn't care that new metadata versions are being created. It does not affect your current dataset's identifiers, validity, or ability to access it or refer to it elsewhere. The old metadata is simply being archived so that it may be accessed or restored later. Bear in mind though, that old metadata versions are still as public information as everything else in the current most recent version.

**How to create a new version of a dataset?**

Creating a new version of a dataset is a manual operation. A new dataset version can be created by calling a special RPC API ``POST /rpc/v2/datasets/create_new_version?identifier=<dataset_identifier>``, which creates a new version of the targeted dataset and creates links between the new and the old version. The new version is saved into draft state, and needs to be separately published by using the designated RPC API.

It should be noted that a dataset can have only one "next version" existing at a time. As long as the newer version is still in draft state, the new dataset version can be freely deleted, but when the new version is published, then the original version can no longer have new versions created from it. It's still possible to manually create a completely new dataset and using the original dataset as a template, and manually describe in metadata that this new dataset is related to another dataset, but the automatic versioning links that are created by using the RPC API will not be there.

It is also possible to create a new dataset version from a deprecated dataset. In this situation, the version creation process creates a new dataset, and automatically removes all files from the dataset that are marked as having been deleted (which caused the original dataset to be marked as deprecated in the first place). While deprecated datasets themselves cannot be restored, a new version can be created where the missing files are removed, in addition to any other corrective measures made by the user.


**Deleting files in a file storage**

In order to be able to add files to a dataset, the files have to be first uploaded to a supported file storage (such as Fairdata IDA), and the file metadata uploaded to Metax. If, for some reason, the files are deleted from the related file storage, and Metax has been aware of the files being deleted, then the related datasets are marked as "deprecated", since Metax can no longer guarantee that the files of the dataset exist anywhere. It is still possible that the dataset is findable and fully downloadable from somewhere else, but as far as Metax knows, the dataset is broken.


**Terminology**

* Metadata version: Only metadata descriptions differ between metadata versions. Identifiers do not change between metadata versions.
* Dataset version: The associated set of files differ between different dataset versions of the same record. Identifiers change between versions.
* Deprecated dataset: When some of the dataset's files have been physically deleted in the related file storage, then that dataset is marked as "deprecated". Deprecated dataset's are still publicly findable, but they are no longer downloadable. It's possible that a deprecated dataset is still findable and downloadable from some other service than Fairdata.


**How to enable versioning in a dataset?**

A data catalog has the setting ``dataset_versioning`` (boolean) which indicates whether or not datasets saved to that catalog should enforce rules related to versioning. In general, versioning is only enabled for IDA catalogs. Versioning cannot be enabled for harvested data catalogs (an error is raised if it is attempted, to prevent accidents).



Browsing a dataset's versions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


**Browsing metadata versions**

The API ``GET /rest/v2/datasets/<pid>/metadata_versions`` can be used to list metadata versions of a specific dataset. Access details of a specific version using the API ``GET /rest/v2/datasets/<pid>/metadata_versions/<metadata_version_identifier>``.


**Browsing dataset versions**

When retrieving a single dataset record, the following version-related fields are always present if other versions exist:

+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Field                    | Purpose                                                                             |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| dataset_version_set      | A list of all other dataset versions of the dataset.                                |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| next_dataset_version     | Link to the next dataset version.                                                   |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| previous_dataset_version | Link to the previous dataset version.                                               |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Using the identifiers provided by the above fields, it's possible to retrieve information about a specific dataset version using the standard datasets API ``GET /rest/v2/datasets/<pid>``.

Note that if the next version of a dataset is still in draft state, then the ``next_dataset_version`` field will only be visible for authorized users (the owner of the dataset), with the field ``state`` present (when the next version is published, ``state`` field will not normally be there). The field ``dataset_version_set`` always only lists published datasets, for all users!



Uniqueness of datasets
-----------------------


**Non-harvested data catalogs**

In non-harvested data catalogs, the uniqueness of a dataset is generally determined by two fields:

* Identifier of the record object (``catalogrecord.identifier``), the value of which is unique globally, and generated server-side when the dataset is created. This is an internal identifier, used to identify and access a particular record in Metax.
* Identifier of the dataset (``catalogrecord.research_dataset.preferred_identifier``). This is the identifier of "The Dataset", i.e. the actual data and metadata you care about. The value is generated server-side when the dataset is created.


**Harvested data catalogs**

In harvested data, the value of preferred_identifier can and should be extracted from the harvested dataset’s source data. The harvester is allowed to set the preferred_identifier for the datasets it creates in Metax, so harvest source organization should indicate which field they would like to use as the preferred_identifier.

The value of ``preferred_identifier`` is unique within its data catalog, so there can co-exist for example three datasets, in three different data catalogs, which have the same ``preferred_identifier`` value. When retrieving details of a single record using the API, information about these "alternate records" is included in the field ``alternate_record_set``, which contains a list of Metax internal identifiers of the other records, and is a read-only field.

If the field ``alternate_record_set`` is missing from a record, it means there are no alternate records sharing the same ``preferred_identifier`` in different data catalogs.


Using an existing dataset as a template
----------------------------------------

If you want to use an existing dataset as a template for a new dataset, you can retrieve a dataset from the API, remove two particular identifying fields from the returned object, and then use the resulting object in a new create request to Metax API. Example:


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    print('Retrieved a dataset that has identifier: %s' response.data['identifier'])

    new_dataset = response.data
    del new_dataset['identifier']
    del new_dataset['research_dataset']['preferred_identifier']

    # note: uses the ?draft=true optional query param, leaving the new dataset into draft state
    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets?draft=true', json=new_dataset, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 201, response.content
    print('Created a new dataset that has identifier: %s' response.data['identifier'])



.. _rst-datasets-reference-data-v2:

Reference data guide
---------------------

A dataset's metadata descriptions requires the use of reference data in quite many places, and actually even the bare minimum accepted dataset already uses reference data in three different fields.

This sub-section contains a table (...a python dictionary) that shows which relations and fields of the field ``research_dataset`` require or offer the option to use reference data. For example, ``research_dataset.language`` is a relation, while ``research_dataset.language.identifier`` is a field of that relation. The table is best inspected when holding in the other hand the visualization at https://tietomallit.suomi.fi/model/mrd, which is a visualization of the schema of field ``research_dataset`` (plus the main record object, ``CatalogRecord``, which is actually what the API ``GET /rest/v2/datasets`` returns).



About ResearchAgent, Organization, and Person
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before diving into the reference data table, a few things should be mentioned about the person and organization -type objects in the dataset schema.

In the schema visualization at https://tietomallit.suomi.fi/model/mrd, there are various relations leading from the object ``ResearchDataset`` to the object ``ResearchAgent`` (`research agent data model <https://tietomallit.suomi.fi/model/mrd/ResearchAgent/>`_). The visualization tool is - at current time - unable to visualize "oneOf"-relations of JSON schemas. If opening one of the actual dataset schema files provided by the API ``/rest/schemas``, such as https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/schemas/ida_dataset, and searching for the string "oneOf" inside that file, you will see that the object ``ResearchAgent`` is actually an instance of either the ``Person`` (`person data model <https://tietomallit.suomi.fi/model/mrd/Person/>`_) or the ``Organization`` (`organization data model <https://tietomallit.suomi.fi/model/mrd/Organization/>`_) object. That means, that for example when setting the ``research_dataset.curator`` relation (which is an array), the contents of the ``curator`` field can be either a person, an organization, or a mix of persons and organizations.

To specify whether some ``ResearchAgent`` object should be of type ``Person`` or of type ``Organization``, do the following:


.. code-block:: python

    # ... other fields
    "curator": [{
        "name": "John Doe",

        # this special field dictates the type. the curator object is of type person.
        "@type": "Person"
    }]
    # ... other fields


Likewise, to specify an ``Organization`` object:


.. code-block:: python

    # ... other fields
    "curator": [{
        # note! for organizations, the "name" field supports translations, and has to specify at least one language!
        "name": {
            "en": Organization X",
            "fi": Organisaatio X",
        },

        # this special field dictates the type. the curator object is of type organization.
        "@type": "Organization"
    }]
    # ... other fields


In the above example, the ``curator`` field is actually an array, so the list of curators can even be a mix of objects where some are persons, and some are organizations.


All this needs to be taken into account when looking which reference data to use, when dealing with ``Person`` or ``Organization`` objects in the schema. 



.. _rst-datasets-reference-data-table-v2:

Reference data table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the table, on the left hand side is described the relation object which uses reference data, and on the right hand side is ``mode``, and ``url``. Note that one or several of the relations can be an array of objects, instead of a single object. ``Mode`` value is either ``required`` or ``optional``, where ``required`` means the relation's identifier field will only accept values from reference data, and all other values will result in a validation error. ``Optional`` means a value from reference data can be used as the identifier's value, if opting to do so, but custom values will also be accepted (such as custom identifiers of organizations, if you have any). The value of the field ``url`` finally is the url where the reference data can be found in ElasticSearch.

Some of the reference data can also be browsed using the koodistot.suomi.fi service: https://koodistot.suomi.fi/registry;registryCode=fairdata. It is important to note that not all reference data indexes are available in that service, but for what's in there, it can be helpful.

In the below table, the person- and organization-related relations have been separated from the rest of the fields that use reference data, to make it easier to find out which reference data to use depending on what kind of object is being used.

It helps to have the `research_dataset data model visualization <https://tietomallit.suomi.fi/model/mrd>`_ open while looking at the table. To help with recognizing which relations are single objects, and which are arrays, the below table has a tailing ``[]`` in field names to signal that the field is actually an array. While effort is made to keep this table up to date, if it looks like it contains mistakes (e.g. some field is actually not an array, or vica versa), the truth is always found in the related dataset JSON schema file.

.. note::

    Below reference data urls contain the ``?pretty=true`` parameter, which formats the output into a more readable form. The default page only shows a few results, so be sure to check out :ref:`rst-reference-data-query-examples-v2` for more examples how to browse reference data in general.


.. code-block:: python

    {
        "research_dataset.access_rights.access_type.identifier":           { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/access_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.access_rights.license[].identifier":             { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/license/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.access_rights.restriction_grounds[].identifier": { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/restriction_grounds/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.directories[].use_category.identifier":          { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/use_category/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.field_of_science[].identifier":                  { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/field_of_science/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.files[].file_type.identifier":                   { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/file_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.files[].use_category.identifier":                { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/use_category/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.infrastructure[].identifier":                    { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/research_infra/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.language[].identifier":                          { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/language/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.other_identifier[].type.identifier":             { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/identifier_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.provenance[].event_outcome.identifier":          { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/event_outcome/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.provenance[].lifecycle_event.identifier":        { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/lifecycle_event/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.provenance[].preservation_event.identifier":     { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/preservation_event/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.provenance[].spatial.place_uri.identifier":      { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/location/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.provenance[].used_entity[].type.identifier":     { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/resource_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.relation[].entity.type.identifier":              { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/resource_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.relation[].relation_type.identifier":            { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/relation_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.remote_resources[].file_type.identifier":        { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/file_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.remote_resources[].license[].identifier":        { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/license/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.remote_resources[].media_type":                  { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/mime_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.remote_resources[].resource_type.identifier":    { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/resource_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.remote_resources[].use_category.identifier":     { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/use_category/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.spatial[].place_uri.identifier":                 { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/location/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.theme[].identifier":                             { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/keyword/_search?pretty=true" },

        # organizations. note! can be recursive through the organization-object's `is_part_of` relation
        "research_dataset.contributor[].contributor_type[].identifier":     { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.contributor[].identifier":                        { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.creator[].contributor_type[].identifier":         { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.creator[].identifier":                            { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.curator[].contributor_type[].identifier":         { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.curator[].identifier":                            { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.is_output_of[].funder_type.identifier":           { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.is_output_of[].has_funding_agency[].identifier":  { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.is_output_of[].source_organization[].identifier": { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.other_identifier[].provider.identifier":          { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.provenance[].was_associated_with.contributor_type[].identifier": { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.publisher[].contributor_type[].identifier":       { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.publisher[].identifier":                          { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.rights_holder[].contributor_type[].identifier":   { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.rights_holder[].identifier":                      { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },

        # persons
        "research_dataset.contributor[].contributor_role[].identifier":   { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_role/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.contributor[].contributor_type[].identifier":   { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.contributor[].member_of.identifier":            { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.creator[].contributor_role[].identifier":       { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_role/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.creator[].contributor_type[].identifier":       { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.creator[].member_of.identifier":                { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.curator[].contributor_role[].identifier":       { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_role/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.curator[].contributor_type[].identifier":       { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.curator[].member_of.identifier":                { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.publisher[].contributor_role[].identifier":     { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_role/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.publisher[].contributor_type[].identifier":     { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.publisher[].member_of.identifier":              { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.provenance[].was_associated_with[].contributor_role[].identifier": { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_role/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.provenance[].was_associated_with[].contributor_type[].identifier": { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_typ/_search?pretty=truee" }
        "research_dataset.provenance[].was_associated_with[].member_of.identifier":          { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.rights_holder[].contributor_role[].identifier": { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_role/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.rights_holder[].contributor_type[].identifier": { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/contributor_type/_search?pretty=true" },
        "research_dataset.rights_holder[].member_of.identifier":          { "mode": "optional", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/organization_data/organization/_search?pretty=true" },
    }


.. note::

    A special note for the relations ``contributor_type`` and ``contributor_role``. In ``ResearchAgent`` relations of type ``Organization``, only the relation ``contributor_type`` can be used. For same relations where type ``Person`` is being used instead, both ``contributor_type`` and ``contributor_role`` can be used. This is also communicated in the schema, but since persons and organizations can often be used in place of each other, this small difference can slip unnoticed! There are other differences in the schema as well of course, but this can be less obvious.


.. only:: rems_enabled

    Using REMS
    -----------


    REMS can be used to give access for downloading dataset files to individual users. When dataset access is REMS managed, dataset owner can decide which users are able to download the files affiliated to the dataset.

    To enable REMS, set ``access_type`` to ``permit`` and ensure that dataset belongs to IDA catalog and has at least one license defined. You can enable REMS when creating a new dataset or later while updating an existing dataset.


    **Changing access type**

    When ``access_type`` is set to ``permit``, dataset downloads are managed by REMS. If this functionality is no longer wanted, simply changing the ``access_type`` to any other access type disables REMS for the dataset. Example of defining permit access type:

    .. code-block:: python

        # ... other fields
        "access_rights": {
            # ... other access rights
            "access_type": {
                "identifier": "http://uri.suomi.fi/codelist/fairdata/access_type/code/permit"
            }
        }
        # ... other fields

    More information about updating a dataset can be found in :ref:`Update examples<rst-dataset-examples-v2>`.


    **Changing license**

    License is required property for those datasets that are managed by REMS. This license is what a downloading user must agree to. If there are multiple licenses described in dataset, REMS only considers the first one. So changing the license in REMS is changing the first license in the dataset. Example of defining a license:

    .. code-block:: python

        # ... other fields
        "access_rights": {
            # ... other access rights
            "license": [
                {
                "identifier": "http://uri.suomi.fi/codelist/fairdata/license/code/CC0-1.0"
                }
            ]
        }
        # ... other fields

    Please refer to :ref:`Update examples<rst-dataset-examples-v2>` for more information about update process.

    .. note:: Changing the license for REMS managed dataset closes all existing download accesses to the dataset.

    **Access granter**

    Metax stores the necessary user information about the access granter in a separate field on CatalogRecord. When making dataset REMS managed, *end users* do not need to worry about this because this information will be automatically gathered from the access token. *Service users* need to provide this information in the request body because this is required property when making dataset REMS managed. Access granter is visible via API only for the owner of the dataset. Example:

    .. code-block:: python

        access_granter = {
            "userid": "jodoe1",
            "name": "John Doe",
            "email": "john.doe@example.com"
        }


.. _rst-dataset-examples-v2:

Examples
---------

These code examples are from the point of view of an end user. Using the API as an end user requires that the user logs in to ``https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/secure`` in order to get a valid access token, which will be used to authenticate with the API. The process for end user authentication is described on the page :doc:`end_users`.

When services accounts interact with Metax, services have the additional responsibility of providing values for fields related to the current user modifying or creating resources, and generally taking care that the user is permitted to do whatever it is that they are doing.



Retrieve minimal valid dataset template
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The API ``GET /rpc/datasets/get_minimal_dataset_template`` returns a valid minimal dataset, that can be used as-is to create a dataset into Metax.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rpc/v2/datasets/get_minimal_dataset_template?type=enduser')
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content

    # dataset_data can now be used in a POST request to create a new dataset!
    dataset_data = response.json()

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets?draft=true', json=dataset_data, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 201, response.content
    print(response.json())


.. important:: The other code examples below contain the full dataset in written form to give you an idea what the dataset contents really look like. While these textual examples can sometimes get outdated, the dataset template from the API is always kept up-to-date, and would serve as a good starting point for your own dataset.



Creating datasets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a dataset with minimum required fields.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    dataset_data = {
        "data_catalog": "urn:nbn:fi:att:data-catalog-att",
        "research_dataset": {
            "title": {
                "en": "Test Dataset Title"
            },
            "description": {
                "en": "A descriptive description describing the contents of this dataset. Must be descriptive."
            },
            "creator": [
                {
                    "name": "Teppo Testaaja",
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "member_of": {
                        "name": {
                            "fi": "Mysteeriorganisaatio"
                        },
                        "@type": "Organization"
                    }
                }
            ],
            "curator": [
                {
                    "name": {
                        "und": "School Services, BIZ"
                    },
                    "@type": "Organization",
                    "identifier": "http://uri.suomi.fi/codelist/fairdata/organization/code/01901"
                }
            ],
            "language":[{
                "title": { "en": "en" },
                "identifier": "http://lexvo.org/id/iso639-3/aar"
            }],
            "access_rights": {
                "access_type": {
                    "identifier": "http://uri.suomi.fi/codelist/fairdata/access_type/code/open"
                }
            }
        }
    }

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets?draft=true', json=dataset_data, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 201, response.content
    print(response.json())


The response should look something like below:


.. code-block:: python

    {
        "id": 9152,
        "identifier": "54efa8b4-f03f-4155-9814-7de6aed4adce",
        "data_catalog": {
            "id": 1,
            "identifier": "urn:nbn:fi:att:data-catalog-att"
        },
        "dataset_version_set": [
            {
                "identifier": "54efa8b4-f03f-4155-9814-7de6aed4adce",
                "preferred_identifier": "urn:nbn:fi:att:58757004-e9b8-4ac6-834c-f5affaa7ec29",
                "removed": false,
                "date_created": "2018-09-10T12:18:38+03:00"
            }
        ],
        "deprecated": false,
        "metadata_owner_org": "myorganization.fi",
        "metadata_provider_org": "myorganization.fi",
        "metadata_provider_user": "myuserid",
        "research_dataset": {
            "title": {
                "en": "Test Dataset Title"
            },

            # <... all the other content that you uploaded ...>

            "preferred_identifier": "draft:54efa8b4-f03f-4155-9814-7de6aed4adce",
            "metadata_version_identifier": "49de6002-df1c-4090-9af6-d4e970904a5b"
        },
        "state": "draft",
        "cumulative_state": 0,
        "preservation_state": 0,
        "removed": False,
        "date_created": "2018-09-10T12:18:38+03:00",
        "user_created": "myuserid"
    }


Explanation of all the fields in the received response/newly created dataset:

* ``id`` An internal database identifier in Metax.
* ``identifier`` The unique identifier of the created record in Metax. This is the identifier to use when interacting with the dataset in Metax in any subsequent requests, such as when retrievng, updating, or deleting the dataset.
* ``dataset_version_set`` List of dataset versions associated with this record. Having just created a new record, there is obviously only one record listed.
* ``deprecated`` When files are deleted or unfrozen from IDA, any datasets containing those files are marked as "deprecated", and the value of this field will be set to ``True``. The value of this field may have an effect in other services, when displaying the dataset contents.
* ``metadata_owner_org``, ``metadata_provider_org``, ``metadata_provider_user`` Information about the creator of the metadata, and the associated organization. These are automatically placed according to the information available from the authentication token.
* ``research_dataset`` Now has two new fields generated by Metax:

    * ``preferred_identifier`` The persistent identifier of the dataset. This is the persistent identifier to use when externally referring to the dataset, in publications etc. When the dataset is in draft state, the value is "draft:<identifier>", which is NOT a real persistent identifier.
    * ``metadata_version_identifier`` The identifier of the specific metadata version. Will be generated by Metax each time the contents of the field ``research_dataset`` changes.

* ``state`` State of the dataset. Value is "draft" or "published".
* ``cumulative_state`` Cumulative state of the dataset..
* ``preservation_state`` The PAS status of the record.
* ``removed`` Value will be ``True`` when the record is deleted.
* ``date_created`` Date when record was created.
* ``user_created`` Identifier of the user who created the record.

.. caution:: While in test environments using the internal ``id`` fields will work in place of the string-form unique identifiers (``identifier`` field), and are very handy for that purpose, in production environment they should never be used, since in some situations they can change without notice and may result in errors or accidentally referring to unintended objects, while the longer identifiers will be persistent, and are always safe to use. Example how to use the internal ``id`` field to retrieve a dataset: https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/12 (note: assuming there exists a record with the id: 12)


**Errors: Required fields missing**


Try to create a dataset with required fields missing. Below example is missing the required field ``data_catalog``.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    dataset_data = {
        "research_dataset": {
            "title": {
                "en": "Test Dataset Title"
            },
            "description": {
                "en": "A descriptive description describing the contents of this dataset. Must be descriptive."
            },
            "creator": [
                {
                    "name": "Teppo Testaaja",
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "member_of": {
                        "name": {
                            "fi": "Mysteeriorganisaatio"
                        },
                        "@type": "Organization"
                    }
                }
            ],
            "curator": [
                {
                    "name": {
                        "und": "School Services, BIZ"
                    },
                    "@type": "Organization",
                    "identifier": "http://uri.suomi.fi/codelist/fairdata/organization/code/01901"
                }
            ],
            "language":[{
                "title": { "en": "en" },
                "identifier": "http://lexvo.org/id/iso639-3/aar"
            }],
            "access_rights": {
                "access_type": {
                    "identifier": "http://uri.suomi.fi/codelist/fairdata/access_type/code/open"
                }
            }
        }
    }

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets?draft=true', json=dataset_data, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 400, response.content
    print(response.json())


The error response should look something like this:

.. code-block:: python

    {
        "data_catalog": [
            "This field is required."
        ]
        "error_identifier": "2018-09-10T08:52:24-4c755256"
    }


**Errors: JSON validation error in field research_dataset**


Try to create a dataset when JSON schema validation fails for field ``research_dataset``. In the below example, the required field ``title`` is missing from the JSON blob inside field ``research_dataset``.

.. important::

    The contents of the field ``research_dataset`` are validated directly against the relevant schema from ``GET /rest/v2/schemas``, so probably either the ``ida`` schema or ``att`` schema, depending on if you are going to include files from the Fairdata IDA service in your dataset or not. When schema validation fails, the entire output from the validator is returned. For an untrained eye, it can be difficult to find the relevant parts from the output. For that reason, it is strongly recommended that you:

    * Periodically upload your dataset to Metax using the optional query parameter ``?dryrun=true``, which executes all validations on the dataset, and returns you the same result it normally would have returned, except nothing really gets saved into Metax database. If you are working on a draft dataset, then using the ``dryrun`` parameter may not be relevant for you.
    * Start with a bare minimum working dataset description, and add new fields and descriptions incrementally, validating the contents periodically. This way, it will be a lot easier to backtrack and find any mistakes in the JSON structure.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    dataset_data = {
        "data_catalog": "urn:nbn:fi:att:data-catalog-att",
        "research_dataset": {
            "description": {
                "en": "A descriptive description describing the contents of this dataset. Must be descriptive."
            },
            "creator": [
                {
                    "name": "Teppo Testaaja",
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "member_of": {
                        "name": {
                            "fi": "Mysteeriorganisaatio"
                        },
                        "@type": "Organization"
                    }
                }
            ],
            "curator": [
                {
                    "name": {
                        "und": "School Services, BIZ"
                    },
                    "@type": "Organization",
                    "identifier": "http://uri.suomi.fi/codelist/fairdata/organization/code/01901"
                }
            ],
            "language":[{
                "title": { "en": "en" },
                "identifier": "http://lexvo.org/id/iso639-3/aar"
            }],
            "access_rights": {
                "access_type": {
                    "identifier": "http://uri.suomi.fi/codelist/fairdata/access_type/code/open"
                }
            }
        }
    }

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets', json=dataset_data, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 400, response.content
    print(response.json())


The error response should look something like this:


.. code-block:: python

    {
        "research_dataset": [
            "'title' is a required property. Json path: []. Schema: { ... <very long output here>"
        ],
        "error_identifier": "2018-09-10T09:04:41-54fb4e22"
    }



Retrieving datasets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Retrieving an existing dataset using a dataset's internal Metax identifier:

.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123')
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    print(response.json())


Here, the ``abc123`` is the Metax internal identifier of the record (field ``identifier``). The retrieved content should look exactly the same as when creating a dataset. See above.

By default, the received data does not include the user metadata of files and directories. In order to include the user metadata, use the optional query parameter ``?include_user_metadata=true``. Then, the user metadata can be found in ``research_dataset.files`` and ``research_dataset.directories``.



Updating datasets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



Update metadata
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Update an existing dataset using a ``PUT`` request:

.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    # first retrieve a dataset that you are the owner of
    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content

    modified_data = response.json()
    modified_data['research_dataset']['description']['en'] = 'A More Accurate Description'

    response = requests.put('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123', json=modified_data, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    print(response.json())


A successful update operation will return the dataset with updated content.

.. caution:: When updating a dataset, be sure to authenticate with the API when retrieving the dataset, since some sensitive fields from the dataset are filtered out when retrieved without authentication (or by the general public). Otherwise, when saving the dataset, you may accidentally lose some data when you upload the modified dataset!

The exact same result can be achieved using a ``PATCH`` request, which allows you to only update specific fields. In the below example, we are updating only the field ``research_dataset``. While you can always use either ``PUT`` or ``PATCH`` for update, ``PATCH`` is always less risky in the sense that you will not accidentally modify fields you didn't intend to. Using ``PATCH`` is more relevant to service accounts, since end user API users already have pretty strict restrictions in place for what fields can be modified.


.. code-block:: python

    # ... the beginning is the same as in the above example

    # only updating the field research_dataset
    modified_data = {
        'research_dataset': response.json()['research_dataset']
    }

    modified_data['research_dataset']['description']['en'] = 'A More Accurdate Description'

    # add the HTTP Authorization header, since authentication will be required when executing write operations in the API.
    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.patch('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123', json=modified_data, headers=headers)

    # ... the rest is the same as in the above example


The outcome of the update operation should be the same as in the above example.



Working with files: Add and exclude files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


**Create a new dataset, while adding files to it**


It's possible to add files to a dataset in the same initial request, where the dataset is first created. More files can the be added or excluded in subsequent requests using a different related API. See other examples.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    # lets assume the cr_data contains all the other necessary minimum fields to create a dataset.

    # note: this entry only tells Metax to add this file to the dataset. the entry itself is not persisted anywhere after
    # processing of the dataset has finished.
    cr_data['research_dataset']['files'] = [
        { 'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9b55n' }
    ]

    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets?draft=true', json=cr_data, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 201, response.content

    # retrieve list of a technical file metadata of a dataset
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert len(response.json()) == 1, response.json()


**Add new files to a draft dataset**


The example assumes a draft dataset has been previously created, without any files.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    # note: this entry only tells Metax to add these files to the dataset. the entries are not persisted anywhere after
    # processing of the dataset has finished.
    file_changes = {
        'files': [
            { 'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9e9db' },
            { 'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9h37f' },
        ]
    }

    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files', json=file_changes, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert response.json()['files_added'] == 2, response.json()

    # retrieve list of a technical file metadata of a dataset
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert len(response.json()) == 2, response.json()

    added_file_identifiers = [ f['identifier'] for f in response.json() ]
    assert '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9e9db' in added_file_identifiers, added_file_identifiers
    assert '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9h37f' in added_file_identifiers, added_file_identifiers


**Add a directory of files to a dataset**


Functionally, adding a directory to a dataset works the exact same way as adding a single file. The effect of adding a directory vs. a single file is a lot greater though, since all the files included in that directory, and its sub-directories, are added to the dataset.

Below is an example similar to the first example where we added files. The dataset in its initial state does not have any files added to it.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    # lets assume the example directories contain a total of 10 files

    file_changes = {
        'directories': [
            { 'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9kk3h' },
            { 'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9br77' },
        ]
    }

    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files', json=file_changes, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert response.json()['files_added'] == 10, response.json()

    # retrieve list of a technical file metadata of a dataset
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert len(response.json()) == 10, response.json()


**Excluding files**


When adding files en masse by adding a directory, it's possible to exclude individual files or directories of files.

When adding and excluding directories in the same request, the entries are processed in the order they are provided in the request. I.e., if at the very end of a list of directory entries which includes some exclusions, a root directory is provided which adds files, then none of the other exclusion entries will have mattered. File entries are processed after directory entries.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    # lets assume the example files contain a total of 10 files, where the excluded directory contains 2 files.
    # the total amount of added files should therefore be 7.

    file_changes = {
        'files': [
            { 'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9b55n', 'exclude': True },
        ],
        'directories': [
            { 'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9kk3h' }, # a directory that contains the other directory, and the other file
            { 'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9br77', 'exclude': True },
        ]
    }

    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files', json=file_changes, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert response.json()['files_added'] == 7, response.json()

    # retrieve list of a technical file metadata of a dataset
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert len(response.json()) == 7, response.json()


**Add files while including user metadata**


When adding files to a dataset, it's possible to include user metadata for those files in the same request body. User metadata can additionally be updated or deleted using a separate API endpoint.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    file_changes = {
        'files': [
            {
                'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9b55n',
                'title': 'Example file',
                'description': 'Detailed description of example file.',
                'use_category': {
                    'identifier': 'source'
                }
            }
        ]
    }

    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files', json=file_changes, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert response.json()['files_added'] == 1, response.json()

    # the files user metadata should now be available from the research_dataset.files relation
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert len(response.json()['research_dataset']['files']) == 1, response.json()
    assert response.json()['research_dataset']['files'][0]['title'] == 'Example file', response.json()


**Retrieve technical metadata of a single file**


Retrieve full technical metadata of a single file of a dataset.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    # retrieve technical metadata of a file
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files/5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9b55n', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert response.json()['identifier'] == '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9b55n', response.json()


Working with files: Updating user metadata
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


In addition to including user metadata when adding the files, user metadata can additionally be updated or deleted using a separate API endpoint.

.. important:: Using this API assumes that the files have been previously added to the dataset. Adding new files to the dataset using this API is NOT possible! Trying to add user metadata for files that have not been added to the dataset will result in an error.

``PUT`` can be used to fully replace user metadata. When initially adding user metadata to a file, the minimum required fields should always be present. After a file already has some user metadata in place, ``PATCH`` can be used to update individual fields of it.


**Add or replace user metadata**


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    file_changes = {
        'files': [
            {
                'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9b55n',
                'title': 'Example file',
                'description': 'Detailed description of example file.',
                'use_category': {
                    'identifier': 'source'
                }
            }
        ]
    }

    response = requests.put('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files/user_metadata', json=file_changes, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content

    # the files user metadata should now be available from the research_dataset.files relation
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert len(response.json()['research_dataset']['files']) == 1, response.json()
    assert response.json()['research_dataset']['files'][0]['title'] == 'Example file', response.json()


**Partially update user metadata**


The example assumes the files have already had user metadata added previously.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    file_changes = {
        'files': [
            {
                'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9b55n',
                'description': 'An improved, more detailed description of example file.',
            }
        ]
    }

    response = requests.patch('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files/user_metadata', json=file_changes, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content

    # the files user metadata should now be available from the research_dataset.files relation
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert len(response.json()['research_dataset']['files']) == 1, response.json()
    assert response.json()['research_dataset']['files'][0]['description'].startswith('An improved'), response.json()


**Deleting user metadata**


Files user metadata can be deleted by adding the key ``delete`` with value ``True`` to any entry in the request body. The example assumes the files have already had user metadata added previously. The key can be used in both ``PUT`` and ``PATCH`` requests when using the ``user_metadata`` API endpoint. The example works the same way for directories.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    file_changes = {
        'files': [
            {
                'identifier': '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9b55n', 'delete': True
            }
        ]
    }

    response = requests.put('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files/user_metadata', json=file_changes, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content

    # the files user metadata should no longer be available from the research_dataset.files relation
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert 'files' not in response.json()['research_dataset'], response.json()


**Retrieve user metadata of a single file**


Retrieve user metadata of a single file of a dataset.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    # retrieve technical metadata of a file
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files/5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9b55n/user_metadata', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert response.json()['identifier'] == '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9b55n', response.json()


**Retrieve user metadata of a single directory**


Retrieve user metadata of a single directory of a dataset using the same API endpoint, but by additionally providing the ``?directory=true`` query parameter, in which case the procided identifier is regarded to be an identifier of a directory instead.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    # retrieve technical metadata of a file
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files/5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9k228/user_metadata?directory=true', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert response.json()['identifier'] == '5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9k228', response.json()



Deleting datasets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


**Deleting a draft dataset**


Delete a draft dataset using a ``DELETE`` request:


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.delete('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 204, response.content

    # the dataset is now removed from the general API results
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123')
    assert response.status_code == 404, 'metax should return 404 due to dataset not found'

    # the dataset should not be findable even if using the ?removed=true parameter
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123?removed=true')
    assert response.status_code == 404, 'dataset should have been permanently deleted'


**Deleting a published dataset**


Delete a published dataset using a ``DELETE`` request:


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.delete('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 204, response.content

    # the dataset is now removed from the general API results
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123')
    assert response.status_code == 404, 'metax should return 404 due to dataset not found'

    # removed datasets are still findable using the ?removed=true parameter
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123?removed=true')
    assert response.status_code == 200, 'metax should have returned a dataset'
    assert response.json()['removed'] is True, 'dataset should be marked as removed'



Publishing datasets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If a dataset has been initially created into draft state, the dataset must be published in order for it to become publicly findable, and for the dataset to receive persistent resolvabe identifiers. Publishing a dataset is done using a special RPC API endpoint, which is only usable by the owner of the dataset. The response from the request should contain the newly generated persistent identifier of the dataset, which is from then on found in the ``research_dataset.preferred_identifier`` field.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rpc/v2/datasets/publish_dataset?identifier=abc123', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert 'preferred_identifier' in response.json(), 'response should include the newly generated preferred_identifier'

    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123')
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content
    assert response.json()['state'] == 'published, 'dataset state should now be published'



Creating a new version of a dataset
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When a dataset has been published, a new version of it can be created using a special RPC API endpoint, which is only usable by the owner of the dataset. The new dataset version is created into draft state.

Being able to create a new version of a dataset in an automated fashion using this API requires that the dataset is created into a data catalog that supports dataset versioning, such as the Fairdata IDA catalog.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    response = requests.post('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rpc/v2/datasets/create_new_version?identifier=abc123', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 201, response.content
    assert 'identifier' in response.json(), 'response should include the internal identifier of the new dataset version'



Browsing a dataset's files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

File metadata of a dataset can be browsed in two ways.

First way is to retrieve a flat list of file metadata of all the files included in the dataset. Be advised though: The below API endpoint does not utilize paging! If the number of files is very large, the amount of data being downloaded by default can be very large! Therefore, it is highly recommended to use the query parameter ``file_fields=field_1,field_2,field_3...`` to only retrieve the information you are interested in:


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    # retrieve all file metadata
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files')
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content

    # retrieve only specified fields from file metadata
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files?file_fields=identifier,file_path')
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content


In addition to above, individual files can be retrieved in the following manner:


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    # retrieve all file metadata
    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files/5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9b55n')
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content


The second way is by using the same API as is used to generally browse the files of a project (see :ref:`rst-browsing-files-v2`). Browsing the files of a dataset works the same way, except that an additional query parameter ``cr_identifier=<dataset_identifer>`` should be provided, in order to retrieve only those files and directories, which are included in the specified dataset.

Example:


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/directories/dir123/files?cr_identifier=abc123')
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content


.. hint:: Etsin, a Fairdata service, provides a nice graphical UI for browsing files of published datasets.


.. note:: When browsing the files of a dataset, authentication with the API is not required, since if a dataset is retrievable from the API, it means it has been published, and its files are now public information.

When browsing files for the purpose of editing a dataset, the query parameter ``?not_cr_identifier=<dataset_identifier>`` can be useful to browse only files that have NOT been added to the dataset. Using this parameter requires that the user is the owner of the dataset, and a member of the project of files being browsed. Example:

.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }

    response = requests.get('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/directories/dir123/files?not_cr_identifier=abc123', headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content



Using reference data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Modifying ``research_dataset`` to contain data that depends on reference data.

Be sure to also check out :ref:`rst-reference-data-query-examples-v2` for useful examples how to browse reference data in general.



Add a directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Below example assumes an existing bare minimum draft dataset, to which some files have already been added. This example adds some user metadata to that directory. The directory-object has a mandatory field called ``use_category``, which requires using a value from reference data in its ``identifier`` field. In the dataset reference data table on this same page(:ref:`rst-datasets-reference-data-table-v2`), we should be able to find this row:


.. code-block:: python

    {
        # ...
        "research_dataset.directories[].use_category.identifier":             { "mode": "required", "url": "https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/use_category/_search?pretty=true" },
        # ...
    }


This means that the field ``research_dataset.directories.use_category.identifier`` uses reference data, and the ``mode`` field in the table indicates the value for ``identifier`` must become from reference data: Custom values are not allowed. The ``url`` shows that valid values can be found from here: https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/es/reference_data/use_category/_search?pretty=true. So we go ahead, and browse the reference data, and in this example, decide that "source code" is a fitting use category for the directory, so the value to use for the identifier field ``research_dataset.directories[].use_category.identifier`` would be the ``uri`` field of the selected reference data: "http://uri.suomi.fi/codelist/fairdata/use_category/code/source". Below is an example how to use the value.

Note: Instead of using the ``uri`` value, ``code`` would work just as well.


.. code-block:: python

    import requests

    headers = { 'Authorization': 'Bearer abc.def.ghi' }
    file_changes = {
        'directories' = [
            {
                "identifier": "5105ab9839f63a909893183c14f9e113",
                "title": "Directory Title",
                "description": "What is this directory about",
                "use_category": {
                    # the value to the below field is from reference data
                    "identifier": "http://uri.suomi.fi/codelist/fairdata/use_category/code/source",
                }
            }
        ]
    }

    response = requests.put('https://__METAX_ENV_DOMAIN__/rest/v2/datasets/abc123/files/user_metadata', json=modified_data, headers=headers)
    assert response.status_code == 200, response.content

When the dataset is updated, some fields inside the field ``use_category`` will have been populated by Metax according to the used reference data.

For more information about reference data, see :doc:`reference_data`.
